Hi friends
In this video let us discuss about the implementation of
adjacency list
So we know that we can represent a graph in
two ways as an adjacecy matrix and
an adjacency list
In the previous video we have learned the implementation of
adjacency matrix
Now let us learn how to implement adjacency list
First we will discuss the case of a directed graph
So this is a directed graph with five vertices
So what will be its adjacency list It will
be five list for each Vertex for vertex zero it
has edges just 1 2 and 3 for vertex one
It has edges to 3 and four for vertex two it
has edge to 3 alone
And for vertex tree it has an edge to four
alone and finally for vertex four has edges to
none of the vertices
So that is the adjacency
list of this particular a graph see how
to implement it
First let us defined the number of vertices V as five
So we are dealing with a graph of five vertices
So what will be its adjacency list It
will be five less that is five linked list so let us
create heads of these five linked list so write
node edge list equal to new node of five
Now we have an add edge function and main function
And as we know execution begins from Main
Now we use an add edge function to add each edge to
our graph
So first let's add an edge from 0 to 1
So call add edge of
Zero comma one
So the function is called and control gets here and
zero is the source Vertex and one is the destination
Vertex here
So these are stored in variables SRC and dest
And what should happen here since we are adding an
edge from 0 to 1 1 should be added in zeros
list
A new node is created at Address 1024 and as
we said since the edges from 0 to 1 this
node should be for vertex
one and it should be attach with vertex
zeros list
So add the data part as dest and next as
null and check
If zero's that is source
Vertex list is empty
And how do we do that Say we have learned
about linked list and to check whether a linked list
is empty we will check if head equal to null
Similarly here we have five linked list and edge list
of zero is the head of first linked list
Edge list of one is the head of second linked
list and so on
So we have to check if source's list is empty
So we have If edge list of SRC equal to null
and it is so this node becomes the first node
in the list
So that is done
The edge from 0 to 1 is added
Now let us add another edge from 0 to 2
So SRC equal to 0 and dest equal to two and
create a new node first
And it is created at Address 2024 and the edge
is from 0 to 2
So the node should be for two and should be
attached with zeroes list
So add data as dest and next as null
Now the node is ready now Check is sources that is
zeros
List is currently empty but it is not so if
fails here so it should be inserted after the last
node of this list
So Travers the linked list to find the last node
and insert the new node after it
So create a temporary pointer last pointing to the head
edge list of SRC and Travers
The list till we have next part of node equal
to null
So we have the condition last next not equal to
null so in first iteration itself Next is equal
To null that is the next part of node at
address 1024 is equal to null so the first node
is also the last node
So insert the new node after the last node the
write last next equal to new node and it is
done
now let us add another edge from 0 to 3 so SRC equal to
0 and dest equal to three and create a new
node first and it is created at address 3024 the
edges from 0 to 3
So the node should be for three and it should
be attached with zeros List
So add data as dest and next as null and
the node is ready now chek if sources list is
currently empty but this not so it should be inserted
after the last node
That is the node for two
So Travers the linked list to find the last node
and insert the new node after it
So create a temporary pointer last pointing to the head
edge list of SRC and Travers
The list till we have next part of node
Equal to null So in first iteration last Next is equal
to 2024 not equal to null move last to
Next node
So last Now has the address 2024 now check
the while condition and last next equal to null
Now that is we have reached the last node now
So control comes out of the loop
So insert new node after the last node so
write last next equal to new node and it is
done the edge is added
Now it is add another edge from 1 to 3
So SRC equal to one dest equal to 3 and create a new
node first and it is created at address 4024
So the node should be for 3 and should be attached
with vertex one's adjacency list
So add data as dest that is three and next
as null
And the node is now ready now check If sources
that is one's list is currently empty and it is
So make the new node the head of the list
that is edge list of one equal to new node
Similarly we can add edges from 1 to 4 2 to
3 and 3 to 4
Now let us call the function print graph to print
the graph and we can simply print each list as
we print any linked list so use a for loop
for each list we have for i equal to zero i less
than V
I++ and in each iteration we will print
edge list of V that is edge list of zero
edge list of one up to edge list of
four so let us
see how in first iteration I equal to 0 so create
a temporary pointer pointing to edge list of Zero and
Print the adjList list of Zero and Travers the list
till the end and print each nodes data so
We have while temp not equal
to null and it is true
So
Print temp data that is data at 1024 which is
one and moved to next node
So temp equal to 2024 now
now check the condition and temp equal
to 2024 not equal to null
so print Data which is two and moved to next node
So temp equal to 3024 condition is still to true
so print data three and moved to next
And since temp next equal to null temp becomes null
now so that while condition fails and control comes out
of loop and Prints null so the first iteration of
for loop is now completed and we got the first
adjacency list printed on the screen
Now in the next iteration I will be equal to
one so adjacency list of one will be printed
Similarly adjacency list of 23 and four will be
printed in the next iterations
So this is how we can implement adjacency
list for graph
We learned how to create graph by adding edges and
how to print it
But there is one problem here
Let us understand it by adding one more edge to
this graph from verdict zero to vertex four
But what is the problem here We had to Travers
the whole linked list to insert the new node while
we add any edge that is if we have K
nodes K iterations are needed to add a new edge
So the time complexity is order of K which is
not very good so let us try to optimise this algorithm
Now we will make a small change in the add edge
function
First as we did we will have five list to
add an edge from 0 to 1
Call add edge of zero coma one
So SRC equal to 0 and Dest equal to one and
create a new node and add data as dest
So the node is now ready Now to insert it
we will inserted at the beginning instead of inserting the
node at the end inserting a node at the end
of a linked list takes order of n time
Where inserting at the beginning
Takes only order of one time
So as we know here the head is edge list
of zero so incert a
New node before edge list of zero
So write new node next equal to edge list of
SRC that is zero and make the new node the
head that is edge
List of SRC equal to new node and it is
done without needing a Traversal and the edge is added
in constant time
Now let us Add another edge from 0 to 2
Similarly create the new node with data two and inserted
at the beginning
So make new node next equal to edge list of
SRC so node is inserted before head and make it
the head
Now similarly we can add edge just in constant time
in previous approach it took order of n time and
here it takes order of one time only
Now let us see how to check whether an edge
is present or not
The idea is that if an edge from 0 to
1 is present there will be a node for one
in zeroes adjacency list
Similarly if there is an edge from 0 to 3
there will be three in zeros list
So it is like searching a node in a linked
list
So we have the function has edge to check it
We will pass the source vertex and destination Vertex to
the function Let us check If there is an edge from
Vertex zero to vertex three So SRC equal to 0 and
Dest equal to three
And we will Travers SRC's
adjacency list and if dest is found at
this present
Otherwise not to create a temporary pointer temp pointing to
Edge list of SRC and using a while loop check
If dest is present in the data part of any
node so in first iteration it is one in second iteration
it is two and in third iteration it is three
which is dest so dest is found which means an edge
from SRC to dest that is 0 to 3 is present in
the graph so return one
And if we Travers the list completely and if dest is
not found control comes out of the loop and return
zero as edge is not present so let us check whether
there is an edge from 1 to 2 so SRC equal to
one and dest equal to two and traversed the list
and compare each nodes data with dest in first iteration
it is three in second iteration it is four and
in third iteration
We have reached the end of the linked list so
control comes out of while loop and returned zero
So that is how we can check whether an edge is
present in a graph or not
So the average time complexity is order of K
If the Vertex has K edges now let us see how
to remove an edge from a graph
And how will you do that to delete
an edge From 0 to 1 We have to delete the
node for one from zeros list and see the adjacency
list is a linked list so to delete
edge From 0 to 1
Search for one in zeros list and deleted
So remove edge is just like deleting a node from
a linked list
so let us remove the edge from 1 to 3
So SRC equal to one and destiny equal to three
So again what should we do Find Dest in edge list
of SRC and then delete it
So first check if edge list of SRC equal to null
that is whether it is empty
If it is empty it means there are no edges
from SRC so just return But here it is not null
So first check if the head as the key to
be deleted
So we have If  adjList of SRC data equal
to dest and see it is so we have to
delete the head of the linked list
We can do that by making the next node as
the head
So write edge list of SRC equal to Edge list
of SRC dot Next and now three is removed from
one's list that is edge from 1 to 3 is
removed from the graph
If the head was not the node to be deleted
then we should traverse the linked list to find that
particular node and then deleted
Let us see an example
Let us remove the edge from 0 to 2 so
SRC equal to zero and dest equal to two
So first check if SRC is list is empty
But it is not so check
If the first node is the node to be deleted
again it is not so
Travers the list to find the node with data dest
that is two
And when it is found we shall do the pointer
adjustments and deleted like this
So it is just like deleting a specific node from
a linked list
So we learnt how to create a directed graph as
adjacency list and how to print it how to
check whether it has a particular edge and how to
remove an edge
So it was all about directed graphs
now let us discuss about the implementation of undirected graphs see
an example undirected graph
See the edge are undirected here in directed graphs the
edges were directed
We could say this edge is from 0 to 1
or from 1 to 0 specifically but here it is
not possible
The edge is between zero and one
It could be from 0 to 1 and also from
1 to 0
That is the difference between directed and undirected graph
So let us
See the implementation
The implementation is not much different
The thing is when we add an edge between zero
and one we are actually adding two edges from 0
to 1 and from 1 to 0
So when we add an edge we have to add
an additional edge in the opposite direction also
So when they had an edge from 1 to 3
we have to add an edge from 3 to 1
also and if we had an edge from 3 to
2 we have to add an edge from 2 to
Also just like that So let us add an edge from
0 to 1 so What should we do We should
add one in zeros adjacency list and also add
zero in one's adjacency list that is add
Dest in SRC is adjacency list and also add SRC
in adjacency list of dest
So create a new node and add Dest's  data and
insert it to edge
List of SRC's beginning so the edge from 0
to 1 is added now add the edge from 1
to 0
So create a new node again and SRC will be
added at the data part and inserted at the beginning
of edge a list of dest
So the edge from 1 to 0 is also added
so that is the only difference
Now let us add another edge between zero and two
So we should add two zeros in adjacency list and
also zero and two in adjacency list that is add
Dest in SRC
adjacency List and add SRC in dest adjacency list
so create a new node at dest's data and inserted
to edge
A list of SRC is beginning so the edge from
zero to two is added Now let us add
the edge from 2 to 0 so create a new
node again and add SRC at data part and inserted
at the beginning of Edge list of dest
So the edge from 2 to 0 is also added
Similarly we can add the remaining edges that's all for
this video
In the next video we will learn the difference between
edge matrix and edge List.